---
title: "Estate Tax Thoughts"
date: 2005-08-26 17:53:01
comments: false
tags:
  - "CSS"
  - "career"
  - "society"
description: "Congress in going back into session after their summer recess and they will be taking a vote on the Estate Tax (or “Death Tax” as some people like to call it). It is a hotly contested issue that I feel very strongly about. The truth is..."
canonical: "https://blog.easy-designs.net/archives/estate-tax-thoughts/"
---

<p>Congress in going back into session after their summer recess and they will be taking a vote on the Estate Tax (or “Death Tax” as some people like to call it). It is a hotly contested issue that I feel very strongly about. The truth is that a lot of public services depend on the revenue generated by the estate tax <em>and</em> the number of people affected by it is less than 1.4% of the population. I should be so lucky to be wealthy enough for my children to have to pay the Estate Tax.</p>

<!-- more -->

<p>I recently wrote to my Senators and Representative to let them know how I feel and I thought I’d share it with you. Maybe you’d like to <a href="http://thomas.loc.gov/">write to yours</a>.</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Dear Senators Dodd and Lieberman and Congresswoman DeLauro,</p>
<p>I am a small business owner and I support preserving the Estate Tax. I owe my life and business to the America the Estate Tax has helped build.</p>
<p>The Estate Tax provides the needed revenue to create wonderful services and opportunities for many companies. Without the internet (which the Estate Tax helped fund), I would not be able to be the successful Web Designer I am. In fact, my career path would never have been an option. Likewise, I may not have had the education to do my job—“nor my employees, theirs—“had it not been for the public school system, also funded in-part by the Estate Tax. Without a stable mail service, I would not be able to send the invoices and receive the payments my buisiness depends on. Without the infrastructure our public highways and roadways provide, I would not be able to travel to meet with clients and my business would suffer. The same goes for air travel: it would not be as safe or reliable if the Federal Government had not used tax revenues (including the Estate Tax) to make it so.</p>
<p>If I should become so wealthy that my children would even have to pay the Estate Tax, I do not feel it would be unfair for the <span class="caps">U.S.</span> Government to ask for a little back to repay the society that has made my business, job and lifestyle a reality. In order to ensure future generations can acheive the success that I have, we need to keep the Estate Tax.</p>
<p>Sincerely,</p>
<p>Aaron Gustafson</p>
</blockquote>
<p>—–</p>
