---
title: "RIP XHTML 2"
date: 2009-07-09 12:46:34
comments: true
tags:
  - "web standards"
  - "HTML"
  - "web development"
description: "I wasn’t planning to weigh in much on this subject, but I’ve been asked by several people for my thoughts, so here we go…"
canonical: "https://blog.easy-designs.net/archives/rip-xhtml2/"
---

<p>I wasn’t planning to weigh in much on this subject, but I’ve been asked by several people for my thoughts, so here we go…</p>
<p>This <a href="http://www.w3.org/News/2009#item119">decision by the W3C to not renew the charter for the <span class="caps">XHTML</span> 2 Working Group</a> has, rather unfortunately, brought out the worst in the Web standards community. Sure, as a community, we’re prone to holy wars over seemingly inconsequential things—<code>abbr</code> vs. <code>acronym</code>, use vs. abuse of definition lists, etc.—but this move has sparked a particularly ugly fight between proponents of <span class="caps">XHTML</span> and its detractors (primarily those folks who think it’s pointless to use <span class="caps">XHTML</span> if you aren’t serving it with an <span class="caps">XML</span> <span class="caps">MIME</span> type).<br/><br/>Personally, I have mixed feelings about the decision. I think there were a lot of good ideas in <span class="caps">XHTML</span> 2 (everything can be a link, for one), but it also had a number of shortcomings. I feel much the same about <span class="caps">HTML</span> 5; some of the new elements make a lot of sense, but others seem to be solving a problem that really wasn’t there to begin with.<br/><br/>In the end, I think this is probably a good move for the W3C as it will, hopefully, allow them to reallocate resources to projects that need them.<br/><br/>But does it mean I think <span class="caps">XHTML</span> is a failure? No.<br/><br/>I think <span class="caps">XHTML</span> was a phenomenal success as it made us look at <span class="caps">HTML</span> in a new light. It forced us to think about how we marked up documents and applied much-needed pressure on developers to make smarter decisions. Without it, I dare say the Web standards movement would never have gotten as much traction as it did and we would still be in the midst of the browser war started more than a dozen years ago.</p>
